>> The Western lifestyle is
built on a fight or flight mode.
Everything is go, go, go.
This response disconnects
people from themselves.
>> It's about raising
people's awareness,
opening up their consciousness,
opening up their horizons.
>> My workday starts at 5:30
in the morning when I wake up.
And usually, I'm going
a million miles an hour
until I fall into bed.
>> I'm a type II diabetic,
diagnosed about a year ago.
>> I lost my mother
two years ago.
>> I got up in the morning
one day and we've kind of just
going, oh, god, I
really need some help.
>> I was shaking and
struggling to breathe.
>> I've been to the doctors, and
he gave me a percentage of have
a heart attack.
And his answer was 18%,
but it should be 1%.
>> I went in for a very standard
eye surgery that went horribly
wrong.
>> I've been having cameras down
and off to the doctors and off
to hospitals.
>> The depression that
just comes, I just, again,
just close off and I
can't really function.
>> This place down in Thailand
says it can actually change
your head around, change
your inner space around.
>> I see and feel different.
It's so bizarre.
>> Heading for a retreat on an
island in the North China Sea,
Nick Knowles joins a group who
are all seeking the antidote
for the strains of modern life.
How will the gang cope with a
completely new way of living?
>> I think that some of the
participants didn't really know
what they were getting into.
>> It's almost cultish.
>> I think it's going
to be a challenge.
>> Will 28 days of detox and
alternative therapies be enough
to change their lives?
>> This is one kickass detox.
>> Welcome to Thailand.
>> Previously on "The Retreat."
>> OK, so we're going to
do five element qigong.
I'm not here to prove
myself or to get
people to jump through hoops.
Nick walked off.
I find that quite rude.
>> My journey here has
come to a natural end.
>> George is going on?
>> Yeah.
He's had enough.
>> He was screaming abuse in
your face all day without it
causing effect.
And very rarely does anybody
right in out of the blue
and go, thanks very much.
>> In preparation for
returning to their real lives,
Dominique and Derek teach
the gang how to prepare tasty
and nutritious vegan food.
>> What I want to do today is I
want to show you things that you
have been eating or drinking
while you've been here for now
three weeks, almost a month.
It's things that you can
make at home to be healthier.
Basically, you want
to alkalize your body
so that you create a
good environment so
that the bacteria,
viruses, don't thrive
and don't party inside of you.
So here I have almonds.
I use raw almonds and I
have soaked them overnight.
You have probably heard many
times, don't eat too many nuts
because it's bad for digestion.
It's because we eat unsoaked
nuts and grains and seeds
since we are children.
So if you soak them, it's
better for digestion.
When you buy a
Vitamix or a blender,
usually it will
come with a nut bag.
If you don't have that,
you can buy something
with a small thread of cotton.
You can use a
shirt, clean shirt.
That will do.
You just want a small thread.
You put it like
this in your bowl.
>> That's what the
nut bag was for.
How embarrassed am I.
[LAUGHTER]
>> What'd you do with it?
>> I was like--
>> You have rich humor.
That is rich.
OK.
And then you pour.
OK, very simple.
Be careful.
>> Amazing that's from one.
>> Voila.
>> Freaking nut.
>> And then you bring the
corners slowly so you don't drop
anything.
And then you milk your cow.
>> Do you know why milking
stalls only got three legs?
>> No.
>> Because the
cows got the udder.
>> That was not
rich, but it was OK.
>> But he's back.
>> He's back.
>> Bill is back.
>> So with some
of the milk bags,
they have a little tie string.
What I do, because it's my
chore and I don't really
like doing it, is I just
tie it on to the cupboard
and let it drip into the bowl.
So then you don't
have to squeeze it.
You can go and do other chores.
>> Other chores?
>> Other chores.
>> What do you do?
>> We're going to make
cashew cheese spread.
Salt.
>> OK.
>> So, of course,
it's not cheese.
It's cashew cheese.
>> Better.
>> This mixture, I use
it as a mayonnaise.
>> No, thanks.
>> That's pretty good.
Like a cheese roll
kind of thing going on.
>> Dried fruit, but
dates are really good.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, we did something.
>> Oh, that looks good.
>> And this is
raspberry and chia.
So I just soak my chia in
the blended raspberry puree,
and that's it.
This one is pecan and
cinnamon ice cream.
And this one is
chocolate ice cream.
And they are both made
from coconut milk.
Yes.
>> Very nice.
>> That's the first time
in this entire trip that--
going to a Michelin
star restaurant
to have a chocolate cheesecake.
I'd rather have that and
the chocolate cheesecake
and that with the fruit in it.
I would rather have than a
pudding in a Michelin star
restaurant as well.
That's the first time I've
been properly blown away.
>> Some of you guys have eaten
the Caesar salad, I heard.
And you liked the dressing.
>> Yeah.
>> So I made this sauce
with, again, cashews.
OK.
So it's always better
to soak your nuts.
I explained to you.
>> Sorry.
>> Oh, my god.
>> You should say the cashews.
>> Never thought veganism
could be so much fun.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The goal of the retreat is
to change the individual through
nutritional, physical, and
mental training to become calm
and in control of the
mind, body, and spirit.
And finally, it seems to
be working, even for Nick.
>> Physically, I'm
a lot healthier.
Mentally, I'm calmer.
And in terms of priorities, I
think I've kind of learnt where
my priorities are rather
than thinking that work is
everything.
>> The gang have arrived to
take up Olarn on his walking
meditation.
One of the ancient world's
oldest meditation techniques,
the walking practice is
an observation-based,
self-exploratory journey, trying
to achieve a balanced mind.
>> In life, normally, we
think now we carry our age,
but we don't have any age.
But the mind from
people keeping memory
for long, long time since
you're a baby until now.
And this is very important to
understand that time is no time.
Today, we're going to
listen to ourselves.
Listen, listen,
and just be aware.
Very, very simple for everyone.
OK.
Just relax.
Keep your mind by your
breathing and by your body.
Keep your feel.
You feel your mind and
you feel your body.
You feel your
breathing and relax.
Very, very relaxing.
This time is a time of relaxing.
Walk as comfortably as
you can, not too fast.
Slowly, slowly, slowly.
Go not too fast.
You can breathe in easy.
Because too fast, you feel
not comfortable to breathe.
Enjoy.
You are a temple.
You make your temple.
>> I developed a lot of
different types of walk
throughout my
three-hour journey.
I found it quite hard, actually.
>> That's hard, especially
walking on this concrete.
And we've been out already
this morning as well.
So it's kind of taken its toll.
>> I found it really difficult
to keep bringing my--
because a noise and your
mind would start going.
>> And using the
zone all the time.
>> Then I was conscious.
I could see people's feet.
>> It's so weird
because this is slow.
>> Slow.
That's the hardest thing.
>> Yeah, kind of controlled.
>> Yeah.
>> And you don't think
that's going to be tiring.
>> Yeah.
>> But it really is.
I could walk for miles now.
I can walk for five
hours at my own pace.
But to walk this slow
in this confined space--
this control, it does
things to your mind.
You know what I mean?
>> I got into a walking zone
where I thought I was walking
quite quickly, but I was
obviously walking slower
because people
were overtaking me.
Even you were overtaking me.
I couldn't believe it.
>> He actually came up to me
and said, slow down, go slowly,
and just think of your steps.
And when I did do that, it
felt like I was floating.
And time just kind of just went.
And then bang,
three hours, done.
>> The gang arrived back
to find Nick packing.
>> I've had a phone call
from home and with an illness
in the family, which is
obviously a bit of a worry.
The net result is that the
person in the family is OK.
But I feel I ought to be there.
And it's interesting because
the point of me coming here
was to try and work out.
Well, to get well, obviously.
But also in my head,
to slow my head down,
to be able to slow my head
down at the end of the day
and the beginning of the day.
But the other thing is,
well, to try and get
that work-life balance right
and I know I need to be there.
And perhaps before I came on
this trip, I would have said,
no, I'm at work, I
need to stay at work.
This is my job and
this is what I do.
But the truth of
the matter is, I
know I need to be home
with that family member
and adding support.
So I think I've learnt the
lessons that I need to learn
here.
I think my life has
changed, so I don't
need to be here any longer.
And it's the right for
me to be there, I think.
>> Before Nick heads
for the airport,
there's just one last
piece of business left.
>> You did your
test this morning.
This is great.
>> Went to the hospital.
I see here that
you lost 10 kilos.
>> Yeah?
>> Good for you.
>> I know.
That's amazing.
>> It was all in your
face and your double chin.
>> You mean I had a double chin?
Yeah I think that's
to be honest true.
>> No, you're looking good.
Blood pressure went down.
You didn't have very high
blood pressure, but--
>> Blood pressure
has always been good.
But it has come down to that
of a 25-year-old athlete.
>> All the canoeing paid off.
You went to the nude beach.
Tell me.
>> Yeah.
That was the motivation
every morning,
to get as far as the nude
beach and come back again.
Yeah.
>> OK.
So the good news is
cholesterol went down.
Total cholesterol.
You were at 227.
>> And I should
really be around--
>> Well, conventional
medicine say under 200,
but cardiologists say under
150 to be at bulletproof risk,
you know?
>> And I am at?
>> And you are now at 156.
So basically,
you're pretty good.
>> Basically, I am now healthy
and I have the physique
and metabolic rate of
a 25-year-old athlete.
It's kind of almost
like a magic bullet.
>> Yeah.
>> And I have to say, I was
skeptical about how much effect
it would have when I came here.
And you've won me over with it.
I think this isn't
just for people
who want to wear baggy
pants and braid their hair.
>> Like me.
>> Well, it should
be for everybody.
And that's--
>> For sure.
>> And I hope that people
will look past the--
>> Setting.
>> The setting and
the accouterments.
>> You can do it at home.
>> Well, yeah, that's the thing.
>> It's true that
when you arrived,
you were skeptical and you
were scaring me a little.
>> Well, why is that?
>> Well, you were scaring
me a little because you were
so skeptical.
But I saw the change.
>> Yeah.
>> I was positive.
I was confident that at the
end, you would see the results.
>> Sadly, April is not seeing
the benefit she had hoped
for with her ongoing
eye condition.
>> Last night was very,
very challenging for me.
I've had so many rips in
my eyes and my corneas
during this time here and
these last couple of days.
I don't know if
you'll see much of me.
And if you don't, I
hope you'll understand.
And I love you guys.
Bye.
>> With April holed
up in her room,
Luke visits with a machine that
measures how her heart rate
variability affects
her nervous system.
>> If you have a high
heart rate variability,
that means your heart
constantly adapts.
And it's a sign of good
health, good homeostasis.
>> The HRV monitor is commonly
used by athletes to measure
their autonomic nervous systems.
>> With you, your heart
rate variability is 60% low.
And that just is
showing for me that we
need to work with your nervous
system a little bit more.
My concern is that
you are looking
to Reiki, to Oren,
to all these healing
modalities outside yourself.
And for me, I would
like you to try and do
things that empower you
more, if that makes sense.
So when you have a
good night's sleep,
I know it's very
easy to be like, yes,
and then have such a high.
And then the next night, if you
don't, it's then such a low.
I know it must be
very difficult.
But when I hear
that you are still
smoking sometimes
or drinking coffee,
then I do ask the question,
what is it that's blocking you
from this self-healing?
And I do just want to
empower you to take this on.
>> Thank you, honey.
>> Feeling better, April joins
the girls and Billy to learn
a yoga technique that takes
their practice to new heights.
>> It's beautiful to feel
that trust and that surrender.
And that's really, to me,
the essence of this practice,
to cultivate these key aspects
in the art of relating.
>> Sebastian practices what
is known as acroyoga and is
designed to enhance and combine
the modalities of physiotherapy,
breathing, mindfulness,
and trust between the two
participants.
>> OK.
>> You're doing it, Billy.
>> Nah.
>> Yes, you are.
>> No, I believe in what I see.
>> Oh, wow.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Ever up for the
whole experience,
Billy steps up to the
plate to have a go,
even after he said he wouldn't.
>> It's great.
All right.
Straight.
Straighten your legs.
There you go.
And look up.
Lift your chest.
Smile.
Flap your wings.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Relaxed and happy, they
enjoy a meal together,
waiting to see what tomorrow's
test results will bring.
>> I have your results.
We looked at the
results from when you
arrived, which were alarming.
We knew that you lost 10 kilos.
>> Yes.
>> Which is amazing.
Which will drop
your cholesterol.
And we will have the proof now.
>> I lost my wallet.
>> Yeah.
>> So you came with a
total cholesterol of 268.
>> Yes.
>> And we learned that
it should be under 150.
Laura, Laura, Laura.
You are down at 191.
>> That's so much.
>> Oh, you did drop.
It's OK.
>> Thank you.
>> Maggie.
>> Yes?
>> Cholesterol total.
You were at 202.
>> Yep.
>> You are down 176.
Good for you.
>> Brilliant.
>> Yeah!
>> Darling.
>> And you are at 181.
>> Wow, that's good.
>> Yes.
150 would be bulletproof.
>> As Dominique takes the gang
through their medical results,
the quantifiable effects are not
the only positive changes that
they'll take home
from the retreat.
>> Good job, Billy.
>> I feel like I'm back and
a lot more engaged and happy
to talk to people.
And--
>> And row with me.
>> And row with you.
And have a go at everyone.
>> Milton?
>> Hey.
>> Results.
More results.
>> Yep.
>> We want more.
So let's go straight to the
diabetes, the blood sugar.
You came here with 170.
>> Yep.
>> Diabetic.
You went down to 101.
>> Yep.
>> Very good.
>> And now, 90 again.
>> Ta-da.
>> It's perfect.
>> The results of the retreat's
28-day program aren't just
surprising to the gang.
A trip back to the hospital for
an evaluation of the results
is also astounding.
>> Quite honestly, I'm amazed.
I'm gobsmacked as a
person of science.
Really, I did not
expect to see this.
I believe in antibiotics
and painkilling medication,
this kind of thing--
and diet to a certain extent.
But for a diet to have
reversed this patient who
had type 2 diabetes, I'm
just completely amazed.
The improvements
are unbelievable.
I mean, for someone
who is diabetic,
type 2, just purely
by changing his diet
to go into normal ranges and
everything across the board.
If he came in here, I would
say he is a healthy person.
He didn't need any
treatment for anything.
I'm really, really amazed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As beautiful as they may be,
the presence of fishing boats
anchored in this bay
can only mean one thing.
>> Look what's happening.
Paradise.
Has come a typhoon of rain,
wind, and massive, massive waves
from the sea.
>> Forced inside by the weather,
the gang get to work on some
dishes for the final meal.
>> This is the easiest
soup you'll ever make.
And this is the one
that you really like.
>> Yeah.
>> The creamy pumpkin soup.
That's why I wanted
to make it today.
And you just cut it
into bit-sized chunks.
>> Right.
>> We could do with some soup
with that going on outside.
You go, Bill.
>> I'm used to this.
I ain't got my [? light ?]
[? glasses ?] on as well.
>> If you don't have your
glasses, then don't do it,
Billy.
>> It's all right.
>> Mind your fingers.
>> You know when it's
changed, it goes red.
>> I've got a bald head, so
I know when it's coming from
the roof.
>> The umbrella.
>> Coming through the roof.
>> Is it?
>> Yeah.
>> Just put them right in.
>> Tasting time.
>> It's going to be hot.
What's it need?
>> It's perfect.
>> As the storm shows no signs
of relenting by the evening,
the gang have had to move from
the beach to higher ground
for the farewell party.
But it still hasn't
dampened their spirits.
And Oren gets the party
going with a Persian santur.
>> It's been a good ride.
I've enjoyed most of it.
Some parts have been
a little bit tricky,
but it's been a great ride.
>> I came out here because
I needed some time for me.
I think I refound
my inner confidence
that I think I'd lost.
>> Me and Kathy, great friends.
You don't know who you're
going to pick or bond with,
but we just kind of
clicked from day one.
I'd say to Kathy, let's come
for a run in the morning.
Yeah, what time?
5:00.
I didn't know she wanted to come
for the whole process of doing
it.
>> Just before I
came, I was quite ill.
So I was taking antidepressants,
antibiotics, steroids.
>> The mental-- and just the
growth thing that I really
wanted to come here and
experience and do the self
confidence, the anxiety, and
just gain the tools to manage
that.
I think Luke and Jackie and
the others have given me that.
>> There's been a lot happening,
and it's been quite difficult
to digest.
>> Learning to work
with my breath,
learning to work with some
different forms of meditation.
>> I know that whatever I decide
that I'm going to do going
on from here, I will succeed.
>> I think I'm going back
a different person to how I
arrived.
>> Gradually, over the
course of the program,
I'm not taking anything now.
>> My head feels brilliant.
My heart feels open.
>> I think there's a lot more
processing to happen post
the retreat.
I'm quite looking
forward to that.
>> Because I've seen it
happen, now I've come here,
got into your process
and done it all,
and seen the results of it all.
I'm not going back there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Before attempting any of the
detox techniques or practices
demonstrated in "The Retreat,"
you are advised to seek out
your doctor's advice.
[MUSIC PLAYING]